---
title: In the Beginning
date: 2020-12-12 00:35:00 +1100
categories: [Blog, Rant]
tags: [blog]     # TAG names should always be lowercase
---

**_Hey,_** this is my first post on this dev blog thing that I made. A few warnings for if you're considering reading:



*   Although I'll be doing my best to make this be readable, I would discourage any expectations for any of this to be 'essay-tier', per se. This is basically just thoughts and progress spewed out onto a reasonable medium.
*   I understand that it's likely that pretty much nobody reads all this. That's okay. It's a nice place to talk to myself.
*   This first post is going to be _quite _long. The coming posts after this one will be less wordy, and contain visual progress. The first paragraph below should hopefully act as a decent TL;DR.

**Summary of this post:** I'm going to make a game. I don't yet know how long it will take. This blog will document my progress. The game will be a classic 2D RPG, inspired by less-classical 2D RPGs like Undertale and Stardew Valley, with a strong focus on writing and polish. For now, I'll be making this in Unity/C# to get accustomed to an industry-standard working environment. Although this is a personal project, I'm hoping that the experience, documentation, and final product I end up with might help me find a job in an industry I'd love to work in, being game design.

_Alright, now for those of you that are reading the rest of the post._


# [In the Beginning](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fWKB8zdVM-U)

I currently work in the cyber-security sector, and have done for almost a couple years now. I enjoy what I do, and I'm truly blessed to be in the position that I'm in. Having just completed my bachelor's in computer science (games development and software design), a month after buying and moving into my own home, I've found myself with more free time than I really know what to do with (which kinda scares me, as a 20 year old). Although I have no gripes with my job, I have a passion for game design, and believe that I have a skillset which allows me to have a go at making my own game. I've programmed for probably 8 years or so in various languages, and have good amounts of experience with drawing, making music, and of course, playing video games.

Whenever I play games, I find myself critiquing them way more than most people. I also have this weird urge to create content for the games I enjoy, whether that's making a video, creating a map, making a post to a subreddit, whatever. I'm always left with this feeling of _'if I made a game, I would…'_. Anyway, this is way too much rambling about myself. Essentially, I've decided to make a game.

On the first day I decided to do any work on this, I started by sitting down, and filling a document with what I wanted the game to be. I pretty much chose an area, be it art direction, sound design, game genre, whatever, and made a decision on what I wanted. I also typed a lot about what I think games should be, and what players typically enjoy/dislike, and why. I wrote non-stop for about 30 minutes to an hour, and ended up with 5 full pages of text. The rest of this post will pretty much be a more nicely-written version of that document. If it seems disjointed, that'll be why :)


## The Decisions I Made

I decided that I would need a way to document my progress. It's all well and good to make a game, but unless you have some way to detail how you've made it, who cares? This is where I decided on this blog. **GitHub** offers some nice free hosting, **Jekyll **offers an easy way to blog with markdown, and **Chirpy** provides a cool theme. I've decided more recently that I'd like to make progress updates whenever I feel that the game is at at least a semi-important development milestone (or just whenever I feel like making a post).

I wanted to use an industry-standard(ish) technology stack. Upon doing some research, I decided that C# was going to be the language. Although I initially wanted to use MonoGame (ex-XNA), but decided to use the Unity Engine, as the resources for it were too good to pass up, and because it's nice to get some experience in what is possibly the most widely-used engine out there.

I knew that I wanted my game to have interesting storyline, told mainly through well-written, unique NPC characters. I think this is what made _Undertale_ my favourite RPG of all time. I wanted the lore to be deep and researchable, with thought put into where the gaps might be, and the opportunity for some easter eggs.

I loved _Stardew Valley_'s and _Red Dead Redemption 2_'s approach to NPCs, in that they have real, predictable schedules that they complete, whether it be by day, by week, by season, or by conditions like weather or holidays. This will probably be one of the later things that I implement, but I think this really brings the player into the game world, and makes people want to learn what they can about the NPCs they find particularly interesting.

The time period and setting for the game was where I put the most thought into. I'm a sucker for the classic, medieval RPG game with swords, bows, arrows, and the like (think _Kingdom Come: Deliverance_), but unfortunately it feels like the time period has been done to death, and although this is a personal project, I'd still like people to play it. There needs to be some sort of uniqueness to the game. I decided to make the time and setting fantasy. Looking back, this should have been a quick decision, based on the depth of lore I wanted to write, but I was caught up in the mindset of a somewhat reality-based game, so I thought my setting had to be Earth. I don't want to fall into the get-out-of-jail-free card that is 'Oh, this is a fantasy, so anything can happen!'. It's cheap, it ruins player immersion, and it only serves as an excuse for poor writing. Keep in mind that this is not me saying that my writing won't be poor, only that I'll strive to not make excuses for it if/when it is.

I made a draft of what I thought the world might look like. I decided on 8 regions. Explaining what the regions will be would ruin the fun, but know that I'm planning on naming them **Otthon**,** Qarae**, the** Resfrian Desert**,** Heichii**,** Verschillia**,** **the** Federation of Eletheria**,** Arrdor**, and the** Harpori Isles**.

The only decision I've made on the OST is (and I quote from what I've written) '_has to slap, and incorporate well into game setting and area_'. This is another reason why I love _Undertale_. I will admit now that whatever OST is made will never compete though, as if I recall correctly, the game's creator, Toby Fox, made the OST first, and the game around it.

As for sound design within the game sounds, optimally I'm looking for them to be basic and 'arcade-y', but still incorporate some nice touches, such as walking sounds that change per environment, and echoes in appropriate spaces, etc.

For the genre of the game, I decided on a role-playing game, or RPG. I want it to be at least semi-open world (think _Pokemon_), have JRPG-inspired combat, and have classical action RPG elements such as levelling, upgrading gear, and quests. Tried and true functionality that's legitimately fun and engaging should be at the forefront of how this game is designed and produced. I'll talk about this more when I talk about combat.

For our protagonist, I originally wanted them to be fully customisable, from clothes to body to name. Currently though, to be truthful, I'm unsure, and leaning towards having a set, named character. Although this is easier for art purposes, it's not the reason I'm making this decision. I feel like I want the player to _resonate_ with their character, and be able to look through their perspective. I don't think I want the player to _be _the character. Having a set protagonist also allows for a backstory, much deeper interactions with NPCs, and a proper character arc that doesn't feel cheap, or cookie-cutter.

I do, however, have some things that I do know that I want for the protagonist. I'd like them to be quiet, but not silent. Confident, but not overtly cocky. Powerful, but not invincible. Understated, but not a pushover. Think _Takumi_, from _Initial D_.

I've never written before. In fact, I've never really been strong with writing at all, even in school. I feel that my vocabulary, spelling, and grammar is fairly strong, but creating narratives was never my thing. Somehow though, when I think about writing a story for a game, my perspective changes. I feel an eagerness to write that I haven't felt before, and a quiet confidence that I can create a deep, lore-filled world. I have no idea what gives me this feeling, so I've decided I'm going to research and reflect on what I consider to be good writing, what worlds I've found myself invested in before, and why. This research will likely range from games like _The Last of Us_, to Anime like _Stein's;Gate_, to TV classics like _Breaking Bad_. I feel that in particular, these examples are great in terms of character development - an area which I would like to put some focus into where I can.

I've decided on a 2D, angled top-down game. _Stardew Valley_ is a great example of one of these. This perspective lets me both have a simple art environment (with room for expansion and refinement), as well as a simulated 3D space that can allow for deeper worlds than I might be able to create with a side-scroller.

A definite for my game is going to be a cosy, homely area, to which the player can return when they feel like. My inspiration for this comes mainly from _The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild_, but not exactly as it's implemented there. Once the Hylian Homeowner questline is completed, Hateno Village becomes that 'home', that Link can return to. I, however, want to combine this with the tutorial area (think The Great Plateau in BOTW, or even Tutorial Island in old-school _Runescape_). Maybe the _Pokemon_ games are a better example of this - a place the player can return to when they're lost, and need a 'constant'. One of the things I will not do is ever jeopardise the safety of this location. There will be no cheap tricks, where your home is invaded, your people are attacked in their own area, or you cannot return. This area is a 100% safe-zone.

As for the art itself, I would like to try to do 100% of this myself. I don't know if this is realistic. I have a pretty good knack for drawing, but a game like this requires some pixel-art experience. I need to be open to commisioning art, but I should not use this as a crutch to not attempt it myself, to the best of my abilities.

In terms of art style, I want the game to look good. I feel like this shouldn't need to be said, but even if the graphics are not spectacular, I want the game to look clean, for everything that needs seeing to be visible, and for areas to have a unique look and feel. Things like clean, 60fps animations, as well as clean, accurate shadows, can help immensely with this. I am going to avoid any kind of motion blur. Motion blur sucks.

In any good game, and any good story, there needs to be an archetype that is at least somewhat followed. I don't know if I might get flack for this in the future since he's a controversial dude (somehow), but I really like listening to Dr. Jordan B. Peterson, especially his talks on archetypal stories, why we have them, and why we need them. I feel like any game should incorporate this. In particular, I would like to create a story centered around the _hero archetype_. Many RPGs do already follow this to a degree, but I would like to follow it more closely. This archetype deals with someone that must overcome great evil, to experience great reward. A protagonist that grips the dreadful predicament that is life by its horns, and doesn't let go. This also lends well into the combat/levelling system, as to overcome suffering in a (setting spoiler) minarchist society, one must improve themselves not just mentally, but physically.

Speaking of the combat system, I have some ideas on what I like and don't like in this area. It should be easy to grasp, with the opportunity for mastery. This makes sure that it's not only engaging in terms of 'the grind', but also legitimately intellectually engaging for the player behind the monitor. Although it is almost completely counter to the RPG and similar genres, I believe heavily in forcing the real life player to improve, instead of only their character. This, of course, does not have to be things like reaction time or aim, and can be things like game and AI pattern knowledge. The great thing about designing a combat system like this is that if it works, the combat system can be exported to a potential future PvP mode, and can be expanded on (think _Gwent_ from _The Witcher 3_ becoming its own, successful game). I like _Undertale_'s concept of having turn-based attack, but live-action defense, and I think incorporating this well into a system that could be PvP in the future could be a legitimate selling point. \
 \
Legitimately challenging AI is a must-include for me. I hate the concept of pseudo-difficulty (and I don't use the word 'hate' lightly there). So many developers get this so, so, wrong. I tend to give them the benefit of the doubt and say that it's a deadline causing it, but I have a gut feeling it's because of laziness. Saying 'Oh this boss is the same as the last 30 bosses, but has 500 million health' **is not difficulty, and hasn't ever been**. If you want the player to feel legitimately accomplished when they 'beat a boss' in your game, you have to make sure they've won because they're _legitimately better than that boss_. A good measure is: could the player skip straight to this boss at the beginning of the game and have _any_ chance of winning (even 0.1%?). If the answer is no - you haven't made an RPG, you've made _Cookie Clicker_ disguised as an RPG.

Some random thoughts on RPG tropes: I like the idea of levelling up a character's stats (although I'm unsure on whether or not to include an 'overall' character level). I like the idea of learning abilities, but not at all in the _Pokemon_ way (they shouldn't just pop into your head, and you suddenly know them). The character should actually learn these ability, in a way that makes sense to the story. I like the idea of purchasing, selling, and upgrading armour, and don't mind the idea of creating scrap out of old or useless items, either. Quests and side-quests are both cool, tried-and-true features, but I will be thinking of ways to somewhat spice these up.

I think it's a good idea to have a way that the player can catch up on the plot of the game. A lot of players will stop playing a game for a while, and then not want to come back to it, as they will have forgotten the world, and the story. I've made the decision to include a historical timeline in the UI with time periods such as _before the events of the game_, _the events of the game that have unfolded thus far_, and, for those that have finished the main storyline, _what might have happened post-game_. A good example of this is in the David Cage games such as _Detroit: Become Human_. Although the games get ragged on a lot, much of their appeal is seeing that timeline of important events, and how they played out. Please do not think that this means that I would necessarily like to incorporate branching paths or 'butterfly effect' into my storyline, though. Some decisions that the player/character can make are obviously good, but not to the depth of these games.

Expanding on what I said earlier regarding intentional plot holes, I tend to think of it like this: \
[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SqGRnlXplx0](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SqGRnlXplx0)

Dialogue is like tennis balls - it should make up the majority of the storytelling. Player quests should be like golf balls - they fill in some gaps, but still leave lore to be explored. There should be readable items such as books or letters (think _Skyrim_) that act as the pebbles, for those interested players. However, **there should be no sand**. The rest of the gaps in the story are intentional, and should leave the players researching even further, creating theories, talking to eachother, and replaying the game to see if there's anything they missed. _Grand Theft Auto V_, surprisingly enough, does a good job of this.

I would like to include seasons in my game, as well as a day-night cycle, and weather patterns. This is technically a _nice-to-have_, but it's something I'd really like. Getting to see the game world change around you is a great motivator to explore and re-explore the world, especially if it's even somewhat open.

A classic RPG that I would like to give a shoutout to is the old browser game (which at a glance looks like is still up today with 91 players!!!) called Dragonfable. I used to play that so much. It was my first RPG experience; one that I enjoyed thoroughly, and still look back on with nostalgia. Gigantic shoutout.

Something to do with NPC parties would be nice. I took a long time thinking about this, due to a conundrum I had. I love the idea of having a team that you can belong to, and work with, to complete difficult quests. However, the traditional RPG player-party often leaves the player disappointed, and feeling under-powered/non-accomplished when they achieve something. I haven't made a complete decision on this, but I'm thinking that maybe having certain NPC groups that you can choose to do quests with might be the way (think _Fallout 4_). 

I do like the idea of having small dialogue decisions that the player can make. I want these to affect relationship 'stats', where the player's relationship with any given NPC can be measured. This should affect things like sales bartering, dialogue options, respect among groups of NPCs, and the opening or closing of certain quest lines.

I want to centre the game around 'rely on nobody but yourself'. It should be possible for the player and the character to complete the game, start to finish, without the help of any other person, or any other character, to preserve the connection that the player has to their character, and the hero archetype that will be so integral to the game.

Also, just a small thing - the ability to save anywhere via the menu should absolutely be a feature. It's extremely annoying to have to ever find a 'save-point'.

I have no idea when I want to get this done by, but I want to get it done. I'm motivated to work on this in my free time, and hope that this motivation will continue. It feels nice to have something I can really apply myself to, and I feel this challenge will help me in more ways than just educationally.

_-Kai_